Scaling for Success: Navigating Hypergrowth
H2: How to hang on when your startup is skyrocketing
Category: 
Tags: 
Image: 

---
title: Scaling for Success: Navigating Hypergrowth
subtitle: How to hang on when your startup is skyrocketing
date: 2016-08-15 15:05 +0000
tags: Scaling, Growth, Marketing, Culture
category: Startups
author_id: kristiklemm
image: https://unsplash.com/collections/286997/startups?photo=hpjSkU2UYSU
banner: false
featured: true
---

It’s every entrepreneur’s dream: their idea blossoms into a solid product built by a great team, then skyrockets to near ubiquity. And while the idea of wild success is what drives founders through the tough times, there are a number of potential pitfalls that arise while on that path, especially if you’re experiencing hypergrowth. 

Hypergrowth can be both a blessing and a curse. Companies that have to scale very quickly make compromises. Oftentimes they overhire, as they’re not operationally built to know exactly what roles they need to have in place to manage an influx of customers. This hurts company culture, in addition to the bottom line. But how can you be sure you’ll be ready to scale? What kind of infrastructure should you have in place to prepare for an extremely large influx of customers, a huge press hit, or a ton of website visitors?

Some of the answers can be found by looking back at startups that went through these very same growing pains.

*Know your numbers.* As soon as it makes sense for your company, start tracking how many people your operation needs in order to service each customer or client. And constantly update this number. With economies of scale, you should not need to continue to hire this number when you double or triple in size--which is a mistake many startups make. Constantly re-evaluate your business processes, and always streamline those processes as your numbers climb.

There are many options if you are hit with an immediate influx and just need people to help manage for the time being, which includes looking into outsourcing. If you can outsource some aspects of your business to temps or consultants without spending a ton of money or compromising quality, do it. Once the dust settles, you can re-evaluate what you really need in terms of permanent staffing. However, this is easier said than done.

[Raise](https://www.raise.com/), a Chicago startup darling of recent years just announced a 15% staff layoff to its online gift card marketplace. The company stated that the layoffs are the result of some processes being automated, which is pretty common once a company settles for a bit after hypergrowth. While 15% of staff is a seemingly large number, the company is fortunately only at 300 employees--so making these cuts now and streamlining operations is much better than waiting until they’re triple their current size. 

*Technology and collaboration are key to scaling successfully.* As your fundraising becomes easier and you begin to suspect that you may be on a potential path towards hypergrowth, follow in the footsteps of giants like Google and Facebook and consider focusing on technology and possible acquisitions. 

For instance, relatively early in its existence, Facebook made a shrewd investment by acquiring a company called FriendFeed, which quickly helped them integrate the now ubiquitous features such as  ‘Like’ and ‘News Feed’. After that, they made a ton of other tech acquisitions, giving them many of the assets necessary for scaling the social network. These acquisitions range from dev shops to patent suites to companies specializing in building mobile infrastructure. 

[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/), while a unique example in its size, is rather replicable in its strategy. They started with a core function or idea that provided its entry into the scene [(their MVP)[(https://www.kohactive.com/startups/three-week-mvp/), then intelligently began to prioritize for the future, investing in acquisitions and strategies that wouldn’t pay off for months or years, but would ensure they could continue to grow with security, flexibility, and innovation. 


*Make employee happiness a priority.* Inside the belly of your tech ship are the employees who make your vision a reality. The folks who are there early enough to get in before your hypergrowth are probably also generally dedicated and protective of what they’ve helped to create. Most likely, they are extremely smart and know that when bigger and bigger figures enter the conversation, it can be easy for sweeping changes to start taking place (for better and worse). 

Communicating with your employees and collaborators as your business experiences rapid growth is extremely important. It is better for them to hear news from you about the company than to read it on Techcrunch. Even beyond that, keeping an open channel with your people about the future will only instill more trust and respect, both of which are crucial to maintaining the soul of your organization that helped carry you to this point. 

[Zenefits](https://www.zenefits.com/), a notable startup that scaled the heights of record angel investment only to epically flop, had several problems that led them there, including plummeting employee morale. Once they started to pick up steam, Zenefits went on hiring sprees and promised far too much to their new employees, which they soon realized. So reward your employees with honesty and loyalty at every stage of your startup’s life, and they’ll likely do the same for you. 

Conversely, as [Zappos](http://www.zappos.com/) began to experience hypergrowth, Tony Hseih and his team evaluated their staff to make sure they were a culture fit. They did this early on, and decided about 15% of their staff did not fit the culture. They famously offered buyouts to these employees, and most of them took the money. They were more careful to hire for culture fit in the future and were able to smartly scale. They did see another small round of layoffs a few years later--and were praised by employees and the media for how they handled it.



Preparing your startup early on and not rushing through the startup phase of your company can help prevent these issues. Please let us know if you would like to discuss scaling your startup! 
